MongoDB Document

MongoDB is a document oriented database and all data is stored in documents. A document is similar to a row in RDBMS. Documents consist of JSON-style (JavaScript Object Notation) field-value pairs and they are stored on the disk in BSON (Binary JSON) serialization format.

The structure of a document is as shown below:

{
	fieldname1: value1,
	fieldname2: value2,
	fieldname3: value3,
	....
	....
	fieldnameN: valueN
}

    The structure of the document is written inside curly brackets
    Field names are strings and can contain any Unicode character except the . (Dot) character
    Field names cannot start with the $ character
    The string _id is a reserved name used to denote a primary key and hence cannot be used as field name
    The : (colon) character separates the field name from its value
    Values can be number, string, boolean, array or any other BSON type
    The field value pairs are separated by comma

Every document in MongoDB has a _id field which is the first field in the document. The _id field is unique to a document collection and contain any BSON data type value except an array. If a document is created without an _id field then MongoDB will automatically add the _id field as the first element of the document and assign its ObjectId value to this field.

MongoDB has a size limitation of 16MB for each documents. This is to ensure that a document does not use excessive amount of RAM or bandwidth.

Here is an example of a document

{
 _id: 200
 title: "Gravity",
 releaseYear: 2013,
 language: "English",
 director:"Alfonso Cuarón",
 cast: ["Sandra Bullock","George Clooney","Ed Harris", "Paul Sharma"],
 awards: [{ award: "Academy Award",
	   category: "Best Director",
	   year: 2014,
	   person: "Alfonso Cuarón"
	}]
 }

The first field in the above document is the _id field with a value 200.

The fields title, language and director have string values and are enclosed in double quotes.

releaseYear field contains number

cast field is an array of strings. Arrays are enclosed in square brackets.

Awards field is an array of objects containing fields awards, category, year and person.


